it's from the UK started wearing
facemasks in countries with a high mass
swearing culture such as Japan Singapore
China the death rate from this virus is
significantly less than he's clear in
the UK and facemasks approve ins help
stop the spread of this virus onto
someone else so why aren't we using them
it may still be a while before
restrictions are eased in the UK so
wouldn't this be a good time to use it
to ask local clothing manufacturers and
there's lots of them in Waterloo more
valeton so manufacturers many face masks
as possible and post them ads I have
salt within the region this would avoid
a possible shortage issue further down
the line should we be wearing face masks
Rachel this is a very interesting
question now that the w-h-o still says
no their advice is not to recommend that
everybody general members of the public
should wear face masks and they have
some very good reasons for concern for
instance if you are a mask you are more
likely to touch your face and we know
that the one of the main routes of
transmission of this virus of infection
is you you've picked it up on your hands
and then you touch either your nose your
eyes or your mouth and so if you have
something across your face that invites
you to touch your face then it
potentially increases the risk of you
infecting yourself there's another
behavioural issue here which is the
perception that if you're wearing a mask
you are somehow more protected and so
you may be more inclined to undertake
riskier behaviors you may not socially
distance in the same way that you would
otherwise so there are some I think
rightly some real concerns around face
masks the flipside of that is there
there there is no randomized controlled
trial evidence for whether or not face
masks are beneficial or not in the case
of coronavirus cove in 19 specifically
we do have some evidence for other
viruses but not this virus unless lots
of countries are enforcing it so Japan
South Korea Hong Kong B and you've got
the Czech Republic Slovakia Germany
France Spain they're all either Spain's
people have to wear them or they're all
encouraging and I
the reason for this is not necessarily
what the public assumed to be the case
so there's two reasons for wearing the
mask one is to decrease your risk of
being infected and the other of course
is to decrease your risk of infecting
other people if you unbeknownst to
yourself have the virus you may be
asymptomatic and unknowingly spreading
it to other people so so a cloth mask is
pretty rubbish as a form of protection
for you against other people coughing
virus particles over you
it may help a little bit it's not that
effective but in terms of you if you're
infected protecting other people from
you transmitting the virus to them then
actually there is evidence that a cloth
mask reduces the amount of virus
particles you are generating to 1:36
of what you would otherwise 1 37 36 so
Lisa Nandi I'm just hearing what Rachel
said now I was also listening to Patrick
Valens the government's chief scientific
adviser on Monday you said as you have
just said MRSA don'ts don't necessarily
protect the general public but they do
help in stopping you transmitting it to
others which struck me in a pandemic is
a pretty good thing to aim for what what
is the labor view on or does the labor
have and does labor have a view on masks
not a scientist and I would definitely
be guided by people who are in terms of
the advice that is given but this week
we had the situation where the governor
of New York came out and said that
people only only be allowed out in
public and because if they're wearing
face masks and I think that's caused a
lot of concern for people in this
country who many of whom aren't on
lockdown I know we keep talking about
lockdown but actually a lot of my
constituents are still going out to work
every day some of them are transport
workers they work in food production you
know as well as the the care sectors
that we've been talking about but others
are just simply going to work in car
park companies or on construction sites
they're going to work in warehouses
packing boxes for the minimum wage and
the
number of reports that I've had from
employees in those industries about
employers who are not following the
government guidance they're not allowing
their employees to work from home if
they can they're not following following
and enforcing social distance measures
and they're not putting in place proper
hand-washing facilities they are really
really worried by these reports about
face masks because if face masks are
needed then they obviously need them and
I think there's a couple of things that
the government could do very quickly the
first is to provide a level of clarity
about that especially for people who are
going out and working on the front line
and the second thing that I think that
they could do as well is to take
seriously at this issue that there are
many many people whose employers are
currently putting them at risk I think
most businesses are trying to do the
right thing but I have been overwhelmed
with reports from people across the
northwest they were dealing with this
and I know that many of our mares and
our council leaders have as well and I
would urge the government to actually
take some action to protect people I
think Lisa makes a really good point
about the way companies are treating
their employees at this time because the
test of leadership has done the good
times it's in the bad times and if a
company puts people first that's the
most important thing the safety and the
welfare of their people first and when
it comes to masks I realized when I went
to Japan for the first time when I saw
people wearing masks
I was then explained that actually they
want to stop you getting infected so
that aspect of it has been about whether
it's protecting ourselves as I said I
listen to Patrick you Alan said it can
stop the transmission I thought well
surely that's that's worth having is
that extent I the government for the way
it's been dealing with this it's been
working with the scientists listening to
the scientists we're all as a country of
following the the what the scientists
are advising us maybe they will come
around to saying we need to use masks so
I might happen well Derek Hunter has
contacted us to say it's so difficult to
buy any face masks in order to protect
yourself many outlets online are
charging over the odds for masks and
that's before you add in the the postage
and packing what's happening with masks
we know the government is reviewing the
the guidelines is it partly because we
just haven't got enough
is it that that genuinely or is it that
the government just isn't decided on
this well I think Rachel's put the point
very clearly about the evidence on this
and I think that where you haven't got
clear evidence that masks are going to
make that key difference then we
shouldn't be priority so these other
countries doing it then but I think I
think it seems puzzling I think the
people are contacting it's not I think
the World Health Organisation advice is
relevant the advice or all of our
medical officers and our scientific
officers is clearly relevant there of
course different types of masks you know
a plain cloth mask is one thing there
are particular surgical masks that
clearly are going to be a real help to
people who are doing close were close
contact work in hospitals or other
places there's a clear case there for
masks that's what the question I mean
III me I listen very careful I take the
point about the idea that you know you
wear a mask to stop you transmitting any
particles or any disease to other people
I think that we're looking very
carefully at the evidence on this and
constantly asking ourselves questions
about you know the strength or otherwise
of it and then taking action but at the
moment I think it's right of us to
prioritize those other types of PPE that
are clearly needed and I'm making a make
a difference of the transmission of this
discount me to the other part of
Richard's question and given how I think
it's fair to say the government's been
caught out with PPE in terms we haven't
had enough certainly as much as people
require Richard is saying wouldn't it be
good to get ahead of this on face masks
and start asking local manufacturers not
making them wouldn't be good to get in
there early well I think I think the
question of getting in there early I
think I think already we've got to pee
pee generally we have ramped up the
operation I think we've got to follow
the evidence if the evidence changes and
we are told that face masks are
necessary I'm confident we can ramp it
up we do have the ability to do that
we've shown in other areas of PPE that
we can do that let's follow that
evidence and assess it regularly I mean
this there's there's two important
points here I'd suggest so one is where
there are not the general public should
be wearing simple they can be cloth they
masks in order to reduce transmission of
this virus to other people and the the
jury is out there the wao is still not
advising that but many national
countries and New York as you say most
definitely are so it would be helpful to
know when the government is going to
give the public a definitive answer on
that I don't think the evidence is going
to change quickly so it would be helpful
to know that sooner rather than later
but there's a second point about the PP
that we most definitely know is needed
an ease needed desperately on the front
line and that is the PPE that is
protecting frontline staff where the NHS
or carers from infection and we know
that there are huge problems with
capacity there now they're not unique to
the UK there are problems all over the
world but we've also got a country in
lockdown right now so we've got all
these SMEs these small and medium sized
businesses so many people up and down
the country who are not working
currently where is the national
government led efforts to boost
production we've got rich are just
interacting about 20 seconds already
Burberry and it's making yes we just
heard Barbour they're making the aprons
they're making gowns and if if moths are
going to be required
I'm sure British person ready to make
those we are out of time I'm afraid
[Music]
you